Massachusetts Air National Guardsman Jack Teixeira, the leader of a Discord group where dozens of sensitive US intelligence documents were posted in recent months, was arrested Thursday.

Teixeira, 21, was taken into custody by the FBI at his home in North Dighton, Mass., about 20 miles east of Providence. 

“The FBI made an arrest and is continuing to conduct authorized law enforcement activity at a residence in North Dighton, Massachusetts,” the bureau said in a brief statement. “As this is an ongoing matter, we cannot provide further comment at this time.”

The New York Times first reported that investigators wanted to talk to Teixeira in connection with the leaks — described as the biggest national security breach in a decade.

The fast-moving developments followed a report by the Washington Post late Wednesday that the classified files had been shared to a Discord channel called “Thug Shaker Central,” made up of two dozen online pals who regularly discussed guns, video games and racist memes.

The outlet reported Thursday that Teixeira was known to channel members by the handle “jackthedripper.”

The head of a Discord group where a trove of sensitive US intelligence documents were posted online has been identified as a Massachusetts Air National Guardsman named Jack Teixeira, according to a new report.
The Times also reported that details of the interior of Teixeira’s childhood home from pictures posted to social media appear to match items identified in the background of some of the photographed secret documents.

Images of the classified documents reviewed by The Post indicate they are copies of briefing slides that were photographed while laid out on a desk or table before being shared online.

In at least two photographs, a brochure with apparent information about a rifle scope can be seen. A package of Gorilla Glue was also spotted in another photograph.

Images of the documents reviewed by The Post indicate they are briefing slides that were photographed while laid out on a desk or table.

In another photograph, a package of Gorilla Glue can be seen
The classified documents were first posted in the group’s Discord chat last year, according to some members.

On Feb. 28, another member then reposted the documents to another Discord channel linked to YouTuber “wow_mao.”

A member of that channel in turn posted some of them on March 4 to the even larger channel “Minecraft Earth Map.”

Police block the road outside the alleged leaker's home 5
Investigators want to talk to the 21-year-old about the leak and say he may have information relevant to the investigation. 
The Wall Street Journal reported that an arrest in the case could happen as soon as Thursday.
After spreading like wildfire through the internet, documents tied to the Ukraine war started turning up on Russian Telegram channels last week — sparking a federal investigation into how the materials were leaked and by whom.  

On Thursday morning, President Biden told reporters in Ireland that federal investigators were “getting close” to uncovering the leaker’s identity.

Following The Post’s latest coverage on the US intelligence leaks scandal

Air National Guardsman Jack Teixeira, 21, arrested in US intel leaks
No one should be shocked by the intelligence leak — Americans have gleefully made it a pattern
Accused US intel leaker seen quietly reading on patio before law enforcement stormed home
Photos, time stamps: Clues that could have given away accused military leaker
“I’m not concerned about the leak,” Biden said in Dublin. “I’m concerned that it happened. But there’s nothing contemporaneous that I’m aware of that is of great consequence.”

Members of Thug Shaker Central told the Times that the person who leaked the materials to their chat was their undisputed leader and often referred to as the “OG,” though they declined to identify him by name.

At least one of the members said the leaker had access to the intelligence materials through his work.  

Several of them, however, insisted that the leaker wasn’t a whistleblower and had never meant for the documents to be shared anywhere other than their online chat.

“This guy was a Christian, anti-war, just wanted to inform some of his friends about what’s going on,” one member told the paper. “We have some people in our group who are in Ukraine. We like fighting games, we like war games.”