As Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. finished reading the majority opinion in the Supreme Court chamber on Thursday, a hushed crowd prepared for the possibility of a rare oral dissent from the liberal wing.

It did not come immediately.

First came a more unusual moment as Justice Clarence Thomas chimed in with an oral concurrence, welcoming the court’s reasoning.

He began by explaining his decision to speak up in support of the ruling, saying “race-based discrimination against Asian American students compels me.”

Justice Thomas then touched on previous rulings by the court, like Plessy v. Ferguson, which he said further entrenched racial inequalities in American society that worsened well into the 20th century as discriminatory policies against Chinese and Japanese immigrants took hold in Western states.

In a solemn tone, he spoke for longer than Chief Justice Roberts.

But Justice Thomas’s colleagues appeared to tense up as he turned to describing the modern era, in which he said college admissions have become a “zero-sum game” in which Asian students suffer because of an outdated overcorrection by courts during the civil rights era.

“This is not 1958 or 1968,” he said. “Today’s youth do not shoulder moral debts of their ancestors.”

Seated to the far left of the bench, Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson, who wrote a dissent, appeared to stiffen.

As Justice Thomas finished, the chamber fell silent. Chief Justice Roberts waited a beat before peering anxiously at Justice Sonia Sotomayor, who was seated two seats from him, next to Justice Thomas.

Just as solemnly, Justice Sotomayor followed with a vastly different view of the role of the court and the legacy of affirmative action.

She denounced the decision as “profoundly wrong,” while arguing that the court had, in effect, condoned systemic racism in the United States. She went on, addressing Justice Thomas directly, as he appeared to shift uncomfortably at times.

“Ignoring racial inequality will not make it disappear,” Justice Sotomayor said.

She gave her own recounting of American history, noting that race has long been used in the segregating of prisons and the drawing of congressional districts, but now cannot inform college admissions decisions.

“Today’s decision imposes a superficial rule of race-blindness on the nation,” she said.

She ended by invoking Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., promising that, despite the decision, “the arc of the moral universe will bend toward racial justice.”

As those words lingered, Chief Justice Roberts adjourned the court until Friday, and all inside were silently ushered out. nytarticle affirmativearticle