The criminal case against him is unfolding as the U.S. government scrambles to protect its secrets. The unauthorized disclosures appear to provide details about the war in Ukraine, intercepted communications about U.S. allies such as Israel, South Korea and Egypt, and details of American penetration of Russian military plans, among other topics. Officials have said the leak is likely to have an impact on U.S. national security worldwide.

Here’s what to know about the leak and how the U.S. and its allies are responding.

Who has been charged in connection with the case?

Prosecutors last week charged Airman First Class Jack Teixeira with unauthorized retention and transmission of national defense information and unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or material. The detention hearing, originally scheduled for Wednesday, was postponed for two weeks.

Air national guardsman Jack Teixeira was taken into custody in Dighton, Mass. 
Airman Teixeira holds the rank of airman first class in an intelligence unit of the Massachusetts Air National Guard and is a junior Air Force communications specialist, according to his service record.

Federal agents took Airman Teixeira into custody at his home in Dighton, Mass., on April 13.

What classified documents were leaked?

The bulk of the more than 60 documents that have been made public so far appear to originate from the Central Intelligence Agency’s Operations Center and the Pentagon’s Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The documents appear to have been printed and folded twice. In some images there are items clearly visible in the background, including a hunting magazine, a knife and a tube of Gorilla-brand glue.

The documents appear to include details about the strength of Ukrainian forces, air defenses and military equipment and classified information about arms and support the U.S. has provided to Kyiv in its fight against Russia.

The leaked files also included purported copies of the daily intelligence report provided to Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Mark Milley, Central Intelligence Agency reports on leaders of Israel’s Mossad spy service, and intelligence on discussions within the government of South Korea on sales of artillery ammunition to Kyiv.

The most damaging files, security analysts say, appear to be the roundups of vetted intelligence material compiled in the CIA Operations Center Intelligence Update. They potentially include information on conversations that the U.S. had intercepted within allied governments, such as communications of the leaders of Israel’s Mossad intelligence service and discussions among members of South Korea’s national-security council on whether to sell ammunition that could end up in Ukraine.

Even more sensitive is the information that appears derived from the U.S. penetration of the Russian government, such as plans by Russian military intelligence to foment an anti-Western and anti-Ukrainian campaign in Africa.

How would a junior airman have gained access to the U.S. government’s most closely guarded documents?

Attorney General Merrick Garland, in announcing the arrest on Thursday, declined to elaborate on how a junior airman would have gained access to some of the U.S. government’s most closely guarded documents. Pentagon officials also have emphasized that the department has strict guidelines on how to safeguard classified documents.

Airman Teixeira was a member of the 102nd Intelligence Wing, defense officials said. The wing’s website says its mission is to “provide worldwide precision intelligence and command and control.”

Airman Teixeira has held a top secret security clearance since 2021 as required for his job, the government’s charging document said.

The kinds of National Guard units to which Airman Teixeira was assigned increasingly have been enlisted in all sorts of sensitive Defense Department missions, including cyber operations, special operations and intelligence support, former officials said.

But a guardsman in the unit has no clear need to know much of the information in the purported classified documents that have surfaced in recent days, said Juliette Kayyem, a former Massachusetts Homeland Security adviser under former Gov. Deval Patrick who oversaw the Massachusetts Air National Guard.

When and where were they posted?

In January, a member of a group numbering just over a dozen began to post the files on the Discord messaging platform. The documents, which appear to have numbered in the hundreds, stayed among the members of the tiny group on Discord until early March, when another user reposted several dozen of them to another group with a larger audience. From there, at least 10 files migrated to a much bigger community focused on the Minecraft computer game. 

On April 5, the Donbass Devushka Telegram account posted four of the allegedly leaked classified documents to its 65,000 followers, according to a screenshot seen by The Wall Street Journal. That led several large Russian social-media accounts to pick up on the documents, after which the Pentagon launched an investigation.

A purported Russian blogger known as Donbass Devushka, which translates as Donbas Girl, reposted the files from obscure online chat rooms. The blog is the face of a network of pro-Kremlin social-media, podcasting, merchandise and fundraising accounts. But the person who hosted podcasts as Donbass Devushka and oversees these accounts is a Washington-state-based former U.S. enlisted aviation electronics technician whose real name is Sarah Bils. In an interview Saturday, Ms. Bils said another administrator posted the four files. She said she is an administrator of the Donbass Devushka persona, and acknowledged raising funds and hosting podcasts under that name.

There is no evidence that Ms. Bils, who had a security clearance during her Navy service, has used that access to steal any classified information herself. The Justice Department and U.S. Navy declined to comment on Ms. Bils and her role in reposting classified information.

What does this mean for the war in Ukraine?

Both the U.S. and allies are assessing the impact of the leak on the war in Ukraine and its relations between Washington and its partners overseas.

While some of the documents are roughly two months old, their disclosure could affect the conduct of the war in Ukraine because they purport to spell out potential battlefield vulnerabilities and the composition of parts of Ukraine’s forces, U.S. officials said.

A senior Ukrainian official has played down the seriousness of the leak, saying they would have no impact on a critical Ukrainian offensive planned for the coming weeks.

What alarming assessments are in the leaked documents?

The leaked presentations, if true, shed new light on the urgency with which Kyiv has been lobbying the U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies to speed up deliveries of Western-made air-defense systems and to provide Ukraine with Western-made jet fighters, such as F-16s.

According to the purported Pentagon presentations, Russia could achieve its goal of air superiority in Ukrainian skies as early as May because Ukraine is running out of antiaircraft missiles. According to a slide dated Feb. 28, Ukraine will have completely depleted its stock of Buk missiles by April 13, and of S-300 missiles by May 3, at current consumption rates. By then, according to a map in another purported Pentagon presentation from Feb. 28, most of Ukraine’s critical national infrastructure outside the Kyiv region and two other areas in southwestern Ukraine will no longer have air-defense cover. The number of unprotected critical sites will soar from six to more than 40, it said.


Ukrainian service members near the front-line city of Bakhmut.
A likely consequence of the looming air-defense crisis, according to one of the documents, is that Ukraine will lose its ability to mass ground forces near the front lines and to conduct a counteroffensive. 

What steps is the government taking to address the leaking of classified documents?

The Pentagon and other components of the intelligence community have moved in recent days to tighten access to classified information, with Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin announcing a 45-day “review and assessment” of the department’s information security procedures.

Air Force Secretary Frank Kendall said on Tuesday that he directed the service’s inspector general to investigate Airman Teixeira’s unit and temporarily reassigned its mission to other parts of the Air Force. The inspector general is seeking to determine whether the unit complied with procedures designed to protect against leaks, defense officials said.

The Air Force also said Tuesday that the 102nd Intelligence Wing “is not currently performing its assigned intelligence mission.”

What are U.S. allies saying?

U.S. allies are playing down the impact of any revelations. Washington’s closest partners—an intelligence-sharing group with Australia, Canada, Great Britain and New Zealand, known as the Five Eyes—are closing ranks to support the U.S.

South Korean officials earlier this week said they were assessing the situation, and an official from the office of President Yoon Suk Yeol said the country would “request, if necessary, the U.S. to take reasonable measures.”

The Israeli intelligence agency, known as the Mossad, has called allegations contained in the apparently leaked documents that it helped stir up protests against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s government “mendacious and without any foundation whatsoever.”

Veteran diplomats have said that allies will keep working with the U.S. because it has the best and most comprehensive intelligence.

How is this different from other intelligence leaks?

This latest suspected leak contains far fewer documents than several previous leaks. But it could have near-term implications because it happened while Ukraine is engaged in military operations against Russia.