TEL AVIV—Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said his country was at war with Hamas after the militant group’s forces poured across the border from Gaza on Saturday, clashing with Israeli forces and pushing into a swath of territory in the south of the country. 

Saturday evening, Israeli soldiers were fighting to regain control and expel militants from Israeli towns and villages, with four army divisions moving to the country’s south. The Israeli military estimated that 3,500 rockets had been fired from Gaza into Israel. Across the country, shaken Israelis sought refuge in safe rooms and bomb shelters. Explosions boomed across Tel Aviv as the country’s Iron Dome air-defense shot down a fusillade of rockets from Gaza on Saturday night, although some fell on the city and injured civilians.

Abu Obeida, the spokesman for Hamas’s armed wing, said the group had abducted dozens of people, including Israeli army officers. He didn’t share the exact number of hostages. “They are all around the Gaza strip,” he said, adding a warning to Israel: “It’s better not to take any irrational decisions.”

The Israeli military said soldiers and civilians had been captured and taken into Gaza, and that most of its casualties weren’t due to rockets but close-contact fighting and “cold-blooded killings” by Hamas. Militants held hostages in at least two Israeli towns, the authorities said. On Sunday morning, Israel’s embassy in Washington said the number of civilians and soldiers captured had reached 100.

A series of explosions rocked Gaza City early Sunday as Israeli forces carried out retaliatory airstrikes following the biggest attack on Israel in years. 
“As we’re speaking, the situation in Israel is still not fully under control,” Israel Defense Forces spokesman Jonathan Conricus said in a live briefing on X, formerly Twitter, around 1:30 a.m. Tel Aviv time. He said Israeli soldiers were still going house-to-house in the southern part of the country near Gaza, in an effort to clear the area of a “high number of hundreds” of Hamas militants who crossed over during the day. He didn’t say how many terrorists might remain, although the IDF killed more than 200 so far.

Meanwhile, Israel hit back with airstrikes that it said targeted Hamas leaders and militants.

“What happened today has never been seen before in Israel, and I will make sure it doesn’t happen again,” said Netanyahu in a nighttime address to the nation. “Difficult days are ahead of us, but we will win.”

The prime minister followed up later in the night, posting on X that Israel had started an offensive and “will continue without hesitation and without respite—until the goals are achieved.”

Netanyahu is in discussions with opposition leaders about forming an emergency unity government. The invasion by Hamas comes amid political turmoil in Israel over a plan by Netanyahu and his far-right allies to weaken the country’s Supreme Court.

Around 300 Israelis, mostly civilians, were confirmed dead and 1,864 wounded, according to Israeli authorities. At least 256 Palestinians have been killed and more than 1,788 injured in Israeli counterstrikes on Gaza, the Palestinian Health Ministry said.

Where Hamas Militants Attacked Israel

Hamas penetrated Israel by air, land and sea from the Gaza Strip, according to the Israeli military.


Towns infiltrated by

Hamas militants

Current ongoing

hostage situation

Note: List of places where rocket sirens were heard is not exhaustive.

The broad attacks unleashed at dawn on the Jewish holiday of Simchat Torah threaten to derail U.S.-brokered talks to normalize relations between Saudi Arabia and Israel and come at a time of significant domestic political turmoil and division within Israel.

In Washington, President Biden said he spoke to Netanyahu and told him the U.S. stands ready to offer all appropriate means of support. 

“The United States unequivocally condemns this appalling assault against Israel by Hamas terrorists from Gaza,” he said. “The United States warns against any other party hostile to Israel seeking advantage in this situation. My administration’s support for Israel’s security is rock solid and unwavering.”

Hamas’s attack also caught the Biden administration by surprise, several senior U.S. civilian and military officials said. These officials said they hadn’t seen any intelligence reports in recent days alerting Washington that the audacious assault was in the works.

The Biden administration said Saturday it was still too early to tell if Iran played a role in the planning of Hamas’s attack, but there was no doubt Tehran has been providing support for Hamas in the form of funding and arms, a senior administration official said. Biden convened his national security team on Saturday to look for ways in which it could assist Israel.

WSJ’s Shayndi Raice reports while sheltering in place in Tel Aviv, following the biggest attack on Israel in years. Hamas launched unprecedented strikes on locations by air, land, and sea, catching the country off-guard on a major holiday. Photo: Hassan Eslaiah/Associated Press
Hamas has called on other Palestinian groups and Arabs more broadly to join its campaign against Israel, saying Saturday’s attacks were just the beginning, raising the specter of a broader conflict. There were limited clashes in the West Bank between Palestinians and Israeli settlers and soldiers.

“We are on the verge of a great victory and clear conquest on the Gaza front,” Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh said in a video. 

In neighboring Lebanon, the Iran-backed militia Hezbollah said it was watching the battle play out “with utmost interest” and that it was in direct contact with Gaza’s rulers. “It sends a message to the Arab and Islamic world, and the international community as a whole, especially those seeking normalization with this enemy, that the Palestinian cause is an everlasting one, alive until victory and liberation,” said Hassan Nasrallah, Hezbollah’s leader. 

Israeli President Isaac Herzog blamed Iran for coordinating the attack by Hamas, calling on the international community to support Israel in condemning the Palestinians militants and Tehran. 

Iran didn’t take responsibility for the attack but Yahya Rahim-Safavi, an adviser to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, said Iran would stand by the Palestinian fighters until they had liberated Palestine and Jerusalem, according to a statement on the state-run ISNA news agency.

“We congratulate the Palestinian fighters for this operation,” he said. 


Police help a woman and child evacuate from a site struck by a rocket in the southern Israeli city of Ashkelon.

Palestinians inspected rubble from a building in Gaza after it was destroyed by Israeli airstrikes on Saturday. 
In response to the attacks, the Israeli military said it launched strikes against 17 military compounds and locations connected to Hamas’s leadership in Gaza. The army released videos of strikes on cars, Palestinian militants and other targets. Dozens of air force jet fighters launched the attacks, the Israeli military said.

The army also flooded southern Israel with ground troops to manage the incursion, it said. The Israeli military said it had named the counteroffensive against Hamas Operation Swords of Iron.

Palestinians in Gaza fled their homes by the thousands in anticipation of Israeli retaliation, seeking shelter in schools. 

Some Hamas militants used paragliders to enter Israel as others came by land and sea, said Richard Hecht, an Israeli military spokesman.

Yoni Asher, 37, said his wife, Doron Asher, 34, went missing along with their two daughters, ages 5 and 3, while she was visiting her mother in Nir Oz, an Israeli village near the border with Gaza. He said no one from the military has been in contact with him formally.

“I need help in trying to locate her,” he said. Later Saturday, footage emerged of his wife and children being held by Hamas militants. 

Doron Asher and her daughters Raz, 5, in pink dress, and Aviv, 3, in white dress, went missing while visiting an Israeli village near the border with Gaza. Footage later showed them being held by Hamas militants.
Residents in the south said they heard gunshots and were sheltering. “We are in a bad situation,” said Yahaloma Zechut, a resident of Ofakim, a city near the Gaza border.

“During all the previous rounds of fighting I was in the shelters and supporting people but the situation now with infiltration into our homes is unbearable. It is very hard.”

The military called up reservists and braced its citizens for more conflict. It warned residents to stay near bomb shelters and obey orders from authorities. Hecht said that the military would take time to decide how to respond to what he called a “dire situation.”

Videos shared on social media by Israeli news organizations showed cars burning and smoke rising from buildings in the southern city of Ashkelon.

Burned-out vehicles outside a residential building in Ashkelon that was hit in a rocket attack. 

Gaza residents fleeing their homes to move away from the border with Israel after barrages of rockets were fired from the coastal enclave. Photo: mahmud hams/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
In another southern city near the border, Sderot, Natan Flayer first heard about a group of militants inside his city from his neighborhood WhatsApp group. “The photos started coming in and it was hard to believe but I recognized it was in Sderot,” he said. “Later, photos of bodies started coming in.”

Israeli police said it was dealing with “several rocket impact sites” in Tel Aviv and had sent four injured civilians to the hospital; a Hamas rocket that hit one residential neighborhood left debris on the street and several vehicles and a multistory building damaged, according to a video by Israel’s emergency services organization.

Tensions at the Gaza-Israel border have been heightened in recent weeks, with Palestinians sending incendiary balloons and the Israeli military conducting airstrikes. But there had been no indications that the tensions would break out into full-scale conflict.

Israel’s military has engaged in on-and-off confrontations with Hamas—which the U.S. considers a terrorist organization—since the group took over the Gaza Strip after a violent battle with Fatah, the political group that controls the Palestinian Authority. In May, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, another militant group in Gaza, and Israel exchanged five days of fire before a cease-fire was called.

In recent years, Israel’s strategy in Gaza has been to intermittently attack militant groups but avoid a full-scale war. The last time ground troops entered Gaza was in 2014. In a strategic briefing earlier this month, the Israeli military described the Gaza Strip as being in a state of “stable instability” and said that Israel was able to use a variety of economic tools to help keep the situation calm. Israel has been handing out more permits to Palestinians to work in the country as part of that effort.

Israeli soldiers taking up positions in Sderot, a city near the border with Gaza. 