Thursday’s 6-3 decision will force a reworking of admissions criteria throughout American higher education, where for decades the pursuit of diversity has been an article of faith.

The watershed decision by Chief Justice John Roberts sets new parameters for the continuing national debate over what criteria should determine who is admitted to the country’s elite institutions and hired into top jobs—crucial springboards for upward mobility in America.

But the immediate impact will be felt in universities that produce a disproportionate share of the nation’s leaders—including the Supreme Court itself, where eight of the nine justices hold degrees from Harvard or Yale.

“For too long,” Roberts wrote, universities “have concluded, wrongly, that the touchstone of an individual’s identity is not challenges bested, skills built, or lessons learned but the color of their skin. Our constitutional history does not tolerate that choice.”

Roberts said admissions officers could consider “an applicant’s discussion of how race affected his or her life, be it through discrimination, inspiration, or otherwise,” he wrote. The difference, he added, is that “the student must be treated based on his or her experiences as an individual—not on the basis of race.”

The Supreme Court considered admissions practices at the University of North Carolina and Harvard University, whose campus in Cambridge, Mass., is shown. 
University officials have insisted no substitute for racial preferences exists that can ensure that a representative share of minority applicants—particularly Black students—gains admission to selective institutions.

No longer able to give such applicants an automatic boost, admissions offices now must decide where racial diversity ranks among priorities that can include academic performance, achievement in extracurricular activities such as athletics, and preferences for alumni and donors.

The split on the court manifests two differing views. Roberts, writing for the majority, asserted that affirmative action is in itself discriminatory. “Eliminating racial discrimination means eliminating all of it,” Roberts, the chief justice, wrote, joined by Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett. “The student must be treated based on his or her experiences as an individual—not on the basis of race. Many universities have for too long done just the opposite,” he wrote.

The dissenters argued that affirmative action is a necessary counterbalance to right the wrongs of centuries of racial discrimination in which nonwhite Americans were denied admission to schools and workplaces despite their qualifications. Society “is not, and has never been, colorblind,” Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote, joined by Justices Elena Kagan and Ketanji Brown Jackson, who recused herself from the portion of the case dealing with Harvard University as a former member of that institution’s Board of Overseers. “The Court ignores the dangerous consequences of an America where its leadership does not reflect the diversity of the People.”

Lee Bollinger, Columbia University’s president, expects five years of chaos before higher education fully adjusts to the new legal landscape, as committees and task forces—already in place at many schools—explore ways to employ income levels, socioeconomic factors and other race-neutral factors to maintain diversity.

President Biden condemned a Supreme Court decision that found it unconstitutional to consider race in university admissions. 
Although long expected, the decision still was a shock to academia. “Nobody really believes it’s going to happen, even though all the evidence is right in front of you,” Bollinger said this month.

Political reactions were immediate and polarized.

“I strongly, strongly disagree with the court’s decision,” President Biden said at the White House. Citing what he called the need for “a new path forward,” the president said he was directing the Education Department to analyze “what practices help build more inclusive and diverse student bodies and what practices hold that back.”

“This is a great day for America,” said former President Donald Trump, the front-runner for the Republicans’ 2024 presidential nomination. “People with extraordinary ability and everything else necessary for success, including future greatness for our Country, are finally being rewarded.”

Before the court were admissions practices at two pillars of American higher education: Harvard College, the Ivy League titan whose name has symbolized achievement and power for centuries, and the University of North Carolina, a public flagship that provides an elite education subsidized by taxpayers for state residents. Both schools said that, consistent with decades of Supreme Court precedent, a minority applicant’s race could serve as an unenumerated plus factor that raised chances of admission.

Thursday’s decision reflected a central theme of Roberts’s jurisprudence: reducing if not abolishing race as a factor in laws and public policy. In 2007, after less than two years as chief justice, Roberts wrote in a landmark opinion: “The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on the basis of race.”

Like that case, Thursday’s decision prompted an impassioned dissent from the court’s liberal minority. “In a society where race continues to matter, there is no constitutional requirement that institutions attempting to remedy their legacies of racial exclusion must operate with a blindfold,” Sotomayor wrote. “The opinion today will serve only to highlight the Court’s own impotence in the face of an America whose cries for equality resound.”


Edward Blum and Abigail Fisher, who challenged the use of race in college admissions, in Washington in 2015. Photo: J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press
The twin lawsuits the court decided on Thursday were organized by Edward Blum, a former stockbroker who has brought a number of cases against laws and policies that make distinctions based on race or ethnicity in areas such as voting and education. 

“The polarizing, stigmatizing and unfair jurisprudence that allowed colleges and universities to use a student’s race and ethnicity as a factor to admit or reject them has been overruled,” Blum said after the ruling. “These discriminatory admission practices undermined the integrity of our country’s civil rights laws.”

Among other claims, Blum’s organization, Students for Fair Admissions, said Harvard discriminated against Asian-American applicants, effectively setting the bar higher for them than for applicants of other races. Roberts, citing data from that group, wrote that well-qualified Black applicants were 4 to 10 times as likely to be admitted to Harvard than similarly qualified Asian-Americans.

UNC Chancellor Kevin M. Guskiewicz said his university “remains firmly committed to bringing together talented students with different perspectives and life experiences,” adding: “While not the outcome we hoped for, we will carefully review the Supreme Court’s decision and take any steps necessary to comply with the law.”

Harvard President Lawrence Bacow and other university officers issued a joint statement saying the nearly 387-year-old institution would comply with the decision while continuing to pursue a diverse student body.

“To prepare leaders for a complex world, Harvard must admit and educate a student body whose members reflect, and have lived, multiple facets of human experience,” they said. “No part of what makes us who we are could ever be irrelevant.”

The case directly affects only the most exclusive of the nation’s universities, those where the pool of qualified applicants vastly exceeds available spaces. Most of America’s colleges admit most if not all qualified students, a point some administrators made Thursday. In a statement, Arizona State University said: “Because ASU admits all Arizona students who meet the university’s admission requirements and does not artificially cap enrollment for students from Arizona, ASU will continue to have one of the most diverse student bodies in the country.”

The 14th Amendment ensures that individuals receive equal protection of the laws from state agencies including public universities, a standard that also applies to most private colleges that receive federal funding. In general, the court has permitted racial preferences only to remedy specific acts of illegal discrimination, not compensate for general social injustices said to stem from historical practices. 

For 45 years, the Supreme Court has recognized a limited exception to that rule for university admissions, one based on the schools’ academic freedom to assemble classes that support their educational mission.

In a 1978 case, Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, the controlling opinion by Justice Lewis Powell struck down a policy that set aside a minimum of 16 seats for minorities applying to the public medical school in Davis, Calif. 

But while racial quotas were barred, the opinion permitted consideration of race as one of several characteristics a student could bring to the campus environment.

Higher education—and much of American corporations—embraced the diversity rationale, but conservatives have viewed affirmative action as a form of social engineering that elevates group identity over individual achievement. Public opinion, even among minority groups likely to benefit, was at best lukewarm to racial preference policies.  

When the issue returned in 2003, the Supreme Court upheld the University of Michigan Law School’s policy allowing consideration of race in “a flexible, nonmechanical way.”


Demonstrators in 1977 in Oakland protested a California court decision in the landmark Bakke case. 
The majority opinion, by Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, cited briefs by major corporations and retired military officers attesting to the importance of diversity among the leadership of American institutions.

Roberts on Thursday referred to that opinion, noting that O’Connor had suggested that 25 years ahead, the court expected racial preferences no longer would be necessary. “Twenty years later, no end is in sight,” he wrote.

Thursday’s decision left for another day the use of racial preferences at the government’s service academies, which the Biden administration and some retired military leaders argued must continue to produce a diverse officer class to promote morale and discipline within the armed forces. “No military academy is a party to these cases,” Roberts wrote, and the armed forces’ interest in diversity hadn’t yet been examined by the lower courts.